Refresh of architecture introduction document. (#250)
kubewarden/docs: docs/architecture.md

### Policy in action

Now that all the plumbing is complete,
Kubernetes starts sending Admission Review requests to the right `policy-server` endpoint.

![Policy in action](/img/architecture_sequence_05.png)

The `policy-server` receives the Admission Request object and,
based on the endpoint that received the request,
uses the correct policy to evaluate it.

Each policy is evaluated inside its own dedicated WebAssembly sandbox.
The communication between `policy-server` (the "host")
and the WebAssembly policy (the "guest")
is done using the waPC communication protocol.
This is covered in the [writing policies](/writing-policies/index.md) documentation.

## How multiple policy servers and policies are handled

A cluster can have many policy servers and Kubewarden policies defined.

Benefits of having many policy servers:
- Noisy Namespaces/Tenants generating lots of policy evaluations
can be isolated from the rest of the cluster and don't affect other users.
- Mission critical policies can be run in a Policy Server "pool",
making your infrastructure more resilient.

Each `policy-server` is defined by its own `PolicyServer` resource

> and each policy is defined by its own `ClusterAdmissionPolicy` resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and each policy is defined by its own `ClusterAdmissionPolicy` or `AdmissionPolicy` resource.
```

Author: Thanks, I added that.

- [`kubewarden-controller`](https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden-controller):
This is a Kubernetes controller that reconciles Kubewarden's Custom Resources.
This component creates parts of the Kubewarden stack.
It also translates Kubewarden configuration into Kubernetes directives.

- Kubewarden policies:
These are WebAssembly modules holding the validation or mutation logic.
WebAssembly modules are covered in depth in
[the 'writing policies' sections](/writing-policies/index.md).

- [`policy-server`](https://github.com/kubewarden/policy-server):
This component receives requests to be validated.
It validates the requests by executing Kubewarden's policies.

Kubewarden integrates with Kubernetes using
[Dynamic Admission Control](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/extensible-admission-controllers/).
In particular, Kubewarden operates as a Kubernetes Admission Webhook.
The `policy-server` is the Webhook endpoint and is called by the Kubernetes API server to validate requests.

Kubernetes discovers Kubewarden's Webhook endpoints with `kubewarden-controller`.
This is done by registering either
a `MutatingWebhookConfiguration`

> or a `ValidatingWebhookConfiguration` object.

Reviewer 2: @kubewarden/kubewarden-developers  we should add a paragraph about Audit Scanner here; I will revisit this later and continue with the review.

Author: Ok, I've added a TODO: as a reminder for doing this. Thanks.

---
sidebar_label: "Architecture"
title: "Architecture"
description: The Kubewarden architecture
keywords: [kubewarden, kubernetes, architecture]
---

<!--TODO:Where did the diagrams come from, what tool? Originals or code still

> exist? What type of architecture diagrams are they.-->

Reviewer 2: they were done by hand by Raúl. It would be better indeed to recreate them with Mermaid.

This is a Kubernetes controller that reconciles Kubewarden's Custom Resources.
This controller creates parts of the Kubewarden stack.
It also translates Kubewarden configuration into Kubernetes directives.

- Kubewarden policies:
These are WebAssembly modules holding the validation or mutation logic.
WebAssembly modules have detailed documentation in the
[writing policies](/writing-policies/index.md) sections.

- [`policy-server`](https://github.com/kubewarden/policy-server):
The `policy-server` receives requests for validation.
It validates the requests by executing Kubewarden policies.

Kubewarden integrates with Kubernetes using
[Dynamic Admission Control](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/extensible-admission-controllers/).
In particular, Kubewarden operates as a Kubernetes Admission Webhook.
The `policy-server` is the Webhook endpoint called by the Kubernetes API server to validate requests.

<!--TODO:Have I got this next paragraph right?-->

Kubernetes discovers Kubewarden's Webhook endpoints using `kubewarden-controller`.
This works by Kubewarden registering either a `MutatingWebhookConfiguration`

> or a `ValidatingWebhookConfiguration` object with Kubernetes.

Reviewer 2: Agree with José. Instead of "Kubernetes discovers Kubewarden's webhooks", it should be directly "`kubewarden-controller` registers the needed `MutatingWebhookConfiguration`
or a `ValidatingWebhookConfiguration` objects in the Kubernetes apiserver".

> or a `ValidatingWebhookConfiguration` object with Kubernetes.

Author: Thanks, Changed as per @viccuad suggestion.

<!--TODO:@vicuad points out we need a paragraph about the Audit Scanner.-->

The diagram shows the architecture of a cluster running the Kubewarden stack:

<!--TODO:To be clear. The stack refers to the entire diagram rather that the
stacked components for e.g., CAP.-->

![Full architecture](/img/architecture.png)

## The journey of a Kubewarden policy

The architecture diagram appears complex at first. This section covers it step by step.

### Default policy server

On a new cluster, the Kubewarden components defined are:

> <!--TODO:How are CRDs shown in the diagram-->

Reviewer 2: Yes, CRDs are just pushed to the k8s apiserver so it gains awareness of `PolicyServer`, `ClusterAdmissionPolicies`, `AdmissionPolicies`, and we can instantiate them. Since the diagram has some of those instantiated, I think it's clear that they are needed.

Server'? Is 'Deployment' capitalization correct? What does 'notices' mean
exactly? For the diagram, what's the difference between solid box, dashed box,
white box, aquamarine box? What are the arrows showing, should they be
labelled?-->

When the `kubewarden-controller` notices the default `PolicyServer` resource,
it creates a Deployment of the `policy-server` component.

As stated above, Kubewarden works as a Kubernetes Admission Webhook. Kubernetes
dictates that all the Webhook endpoints must be secured with TLS.
`kubewarden-controller` takes care of setting up this secure communication
by doing these steps:
Kubewarden works as a Kubernetes Admission Webhook.
Kubernetes specifies using TLS to secure all Webhook endpoints.
The `kubewarden-controller` sets up this secure communication
by:

1. Generating a self-signed Certificate Authority
1. Use this CA to generate a TLS certificate key for the `policy-server` Service.

<!--The capitalization on Secret is ok? Maybe in ``?-->

1. Generate a self-signed Certificate Authority
1. Use this CA to generate a TLS certificate and a TLS key for the
   `policy-server` Service.
These objects are all stored as Secret resources in Kubernetes.

> All these objects are stored into Kubernetes as Secret resources.

Author: Thanks.

> Should it be?-->

Reviewer: Yes, the service is not shown in the diagram. Maybe we can add it when we improve the diagram as a whole

Reviewer 2: I think it's a good idea to add the k8s apiserver. Right now it is included in the "Kubernetes control plane" box.
 In the future, when showing the `audit-scanner` component, it will be obvious that normal requests go from the k8s apiserver to the webhooks, to the policy-server, and back. Meanwhile the audit-scanner doesn't receive requests.

> be bound is, how it happens, where, etc?-->

Reviewer: I think the word "bound" wants to tell is that the policy must define on which policy server it will run. It's not possible to run the policy in multiples policy servers. If not defined, the `default` policy server will be choose. I'm referring to the policy definition. Not the wasm module.

 In other words, you can have different policies with the same wasm module (even with the same settings) running in multiple servers. But you cannot have a single policy definition that will run in multiple policy servers.

> ClusterAdmissionPolicy?-->

Reviewer: > There is ClusterAdmissionPolicy inside and outside the API Server box.  What is this signifying? And for PolicyServer? 

I believe this is trying to represent is the act of the user sending this `PolicyServer` and `ClusterAdmissionPolicy` definition to the Kubernetes API to be processed by the controller

> Definition of reconcile? Just to find the PolicyServer that matches the ClusterAdmissionPolicy?

Reconciliation is what  the controller does. It watches for the policy server and policies definition and translate that to Kubernetes primitives that matches what the users want when they deploy these resources.

Author: Thanks.

> somehow? ConfigMap, should be in the diagram? In the OCI registry?-->

Reviewer: I think is doable. But I guess we need to change the diagram, and maybe the kind of it, to show this logic properly.

Reviewer 2: it's doable, but it's a bit of work tbh. It means making diagrams for the code in kubewarden-controller, which are more specific and get out of sync. I'm ok just saying "reconciling" here.

Author: ok, thanks.

> specifies, right?-->

Reviewer: Yes. All the policy servers have a configmap with all the policies it must run with they configuration and information required to run it. Including from where they should be downloaded.

Author: Thanks.

At start time, the `policy-server` reads its configuration
and downloads all the Kubewarden policies specified.
You can download policies from remote HTTP servers and container registries.

You use policy configuration parameters to tune a policies' behavior.
After startup and policy download the `policy-server`
checks the policy settings provided by the user are valid.

The `policy-server` validates policy settings by invoking
the `validate_setting` function exposed by each policy.
There is further documentation in the
[writing policies section](/writing-policies/spec/01-intro-spec.md)
of the documentation.

<!--TODO:Next paragraph. 'end-user'? How are the configuration parameters

> specified for the `policy-server`-->

Reviewer: It's possible that the "end-user" (a.k.a. person who deployed the policy) provide a invalid policy settings. Therefore, there is a function called in the policy module to validate the setting provided by the user in the policy definition. If the function returns that the settings are not valid the policy server will not start until the policy is fixed.

Reviewer 2: for more clarification, this is passed with the [`spec.settings`](https://doc.crds.dev/github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden-controller/policies.kubewarden.io/ClusterAdmissionPolicy/v1@v1.7.0-rc3#spec-settings) of the (Cluster)AdmissionPolicy definition. For example [this](https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden-controller/blob/main/config/samples/policies_v1_clusteradmissionpolicy.yaml#L17-L21). See also the quickstart on docs.

The `policy-server` exits with an error if one or more policies
received wrong configuration parameters from the end-user.

<!--TODO:Can we show the pool of worker threads in the diagram? Or maybe

> it's the stacked things?-->

Reviewer: We can add this in the new version of the diagram if this is important.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure it adds much, the pool is abstract at this moment, and we don't get into details on the scheduling inside of the pool.

Author: I don't think it's important if you guys don't. It's an architecture overview. The idea being so that a Kubewarden User has a grasp of how KW is put together and works to best use its features. So, describing worker threads in any detail is getting in too deep here. Thanks.

Author: Thanks.

If all policies are correctly configured,
`policy-server`
spawns a pool of worker threads
to evaluate incoming requests
using the Kubewarden policies
specified by the user.

<!--TODO:Is the HTTPS server referred to, that which is in the aquamarine

> box, the 'Kubewarden Policy Server-->

Reviewer: As far I can understand, yes. The box represents all the components required to run the policy server in the cluster.

Author: Thanks.

Finally, the `policy-server` starts a HTTPS server
listening to incoming validation requests.
Kubewarden uses the TLS key and certificate
created by `kubewarden-controller`
to secure the web server.

The web server exposes each policy by a dedicated path
following the naming convention: `/validate/<policy ID>`.

This diagram shows the cluster when initialization of `policy-server` is complete:

![policy-server initialized](/img/architecture_sequence_03.png)

### Making Kubernetes aware of the policy

<!--TODO:Next paragraph. Says 'admission reviews', should that maybe be

> 'admission requests'-->

Reviewer: Not really. The resource kind is actually [`AdmissionReview`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/extensible-admission-controllers/#webhook-request-and-response).

Author: OK, so AdmissionReview is a procedure happening when processing Admission Requests?. I think I need some more explanation for this.

Author: Ok thanks using `AdmissionReview` and a link

The `policy-server` Pods have a
[`Readiness Probe`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-liveness-readiness-startup-probes/),
that `kubewarden-controller` uses to check when
the `policy-server` Deployment is ready to evaluate admission reviews.

> <!--TODO:Aware? Is notified? Notifies? Is 'notifies' technically correct? Messages?-->

Reviewer: The "notifies" here means that the controller will register the `MutatingWebhookConfiguration` or `ValidatingWebhookConfiguration` in the Kubernetes control plane to tell it that it must ask Kubewarden policies if a new resource is allowed in the cluster or not.

Reviewer: The `*WebhookConfiguration` objects is the way you tell Kubernetes that it must ask a 3rd party to validate a new resource in the cluster.

Author: ok, thanks

Once the readiness probe marks a `policy-server` Deployment as `Ready`,
the `kubewarden-controller` notifies the Kubernetes API server about the new policy
by creating either a `MutatingWebhookConfiguration`
or a `ValidatingWebhookConfiguration` object.

Each policy has a dedicated
`MutatingWebhookConfiguration` or `ValidatingWebhookConfiguration`
which points to the Webhook endpoint served by `policy-server`.
The endpoint is reachable by the `/validate/<policy ID>` URL.

![Kubernetes Webhook endpoint configuration](/img/architecture_sequence_04.png)

### Policy in action

> <!--TODO:I made endpoints plural. I think there are many. Is that correct?-->

Reviewer: Yes. Each policy has its own endpoint

A `policy-server` receives the Admission Request object and,
based on the endpoint that received the request,
uses the correct policy to evaluate it.

Each policy evaluates inside its own dedicated WebAssembly sandbox.
The communication between `policy-server` (the "host")
and the WebAssembly policy (the "guest")
uses the waPC communication protocol.
There is a description of using the protocol in the [writing policies](/writing-policies/index.md) documentation.

## How Kubewarden handles many policy servers and policies

A cluster can have many policy servers and Kubewarden policies defined.
There are benefits of having many policy servers:

- You can isolate noisy namespaces or tenants,
those generating many policy evaluations,
from the rest of the cluster so as not to adversely affect other cluster operations.

- You can run mission-critical policies in a dedicated Policy Server pool,
making your infrastructure more resilient.

A `PolicyServer` resource defines each `policy-server`
and a `ClusterAdmissionPolicy` or `AdmissionPolicy` resource defines each policy.

This leads back to the initial diagram:

![Full architecture](/img/architecture.png)

> <!--TODO:is/are bound or binds? What does the binding and how?-->

Reviewer: The same of what I've already explain in a previous comment. I'll skip this one just to make things easier. Let me know if you think that explanation is not good enough.

Author: That's fine

---

<!--TODO:Where did the diagrams come from, what tool? Originals or code still
exist? What type of architecture diagrams are they.-->

Kubewarden is a Kubernetes policy engine.
It uses policies written in a programming language of your choosing.
This language must generate a WebAssembly binary for Kubewarden to use.

The Kubewarden stack consists of these components:

- Kubewarden Custom Resources:
These are [Kubernetes Custom Resources](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/)
that simplify the process of managing policies.

- [`kubewarden-controller`](https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden-controller):
This is a Kubernetes controller that reconciles Kubewarden's Custom Resources.
This controller creates parts of the Kubewarden stack.
It also translates Kubewarden configuration into Kubernetes directives.

- Kubewarden policies:
These are WebAssembly modules holding the validation or mutation logic.
WebAssembly modules have detailed documentation in the
[writing policies](/writing-policies/index.md) sections.

- [`policy-server`](https://github.com/kubewarden/policy-server):
The `policy-server` receives requests for validation.

> It validates the requests by executing Kubewarden policies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It validates the requests by executing Kubewarden policies.

- [audit-scanner](https://github.com/kubewarden/audit-scanner): It inspects the resources already in the cluster and identifies the ones that are violating Kubewarden policies.

```

Kubewarden integrates with Kubernetes using
[Dynamic Admission Control](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/extensible-admission-controllers/).
In particular, Kubewarden operates as a Kubernetes Admission Webhook.
The `policy-server` is the Webhook endpoint called by the Kubernetes API server to validate requests.

<!--TODO:Have I got this next paragraph right?-->

Kubernetes discovers Kubewarden's Webhook endpoints using `kubewarden-controller`.
This works by Kubewarden registering either a `MutatingWebhookConfiguration`
or a `ValidatingWebhookConfiguration` object with Kubernetes.

> <!--TODO:@vicuad points out we need a paragraph about the Audit Scanner.-->

Reviewer 2: Added one here: https://github.com/kubewarden/docs/pull/250/files#r1345628260.

Author: Thanks, done

The diagram shows the architecture of a cluster running the Kubewarden stack:

<!--TODO:To be clear. The stack refers to the entire diagram rather that the
stacked components for e.g., CAP.-->

<!--TODO:Do we really need the full diagram at this point. Maybe start
with the simpler one in the next section-->

![Full architecture](/img/architecture.png)

## The journey of a Kubewarden policy

The architecture diagram appears complex at first.
This section covers it step by step.

### Default policy server

On a new cluster, the Kubewarden components defined are:

<!--TODO:How are CRDs shown in the diagram-->

- the Custom Resource Definitions (CRD)
- the `kubewarden-controller` Deployment
- a `PolicyServer` Custom Resource named `default`.

![Defining the first ClusterAdmissionPolicy resource](/img/architecture_sequence_01.png)

<!--TODO:For the next paragraph. What type of architecture diagram is this? In the
diagram, which is `policy-server`. The aquamarine box with 'Kubewarden Policy

> Server'? Is 'Deployment' capitalization correct? What does 'notices' mean

Reviewer 2: > What type of architecture diagram is this? In the
diagram, which is `policy-server`

It's an informal one., roughly like [C4 in Mermaid](http://mermaid.js.org/syntax/c4.html). We should come up with a better diagram, plus maybe [sequence diagrams](http://mermaid.js.org/syntax/sequenceDiagram.html), but not for this PR.

> Is 'Deployment' capitalization correct?

Yes, it's customary to uppercase k8s resources to distinguish them.

exactly? For the diagram, what's the difference between solid box, dashed box,
white box, aquamarine box? What are the arrows showing, should they be
labelled?-->

When the `kubewarden-controller` notices the default `PolicyServer` resource,
it creates a Deployment of the `policy-server` component.

Kubewarden works as a Kubernetes Admission Webhook.
Kubernetes specifies using TLS to secure all Webhook endpoints.
The `kubewarden-controller` sets up this secure communication
by:

1. Generating a self-signed Certificate Authority
1. Use this CA to generate a TLS certificate key for the `policy-server` Service.

> <!--The capitalization on Secret is ok? Maybe in ``?-->

Reviewer 2: it is, as it is a Kubernetes resource (see [k8s api docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.26/#secret-v1-core)).

Author: Thanks

bound to the default `policy-server` in the cluster:

![Defining the first ClusterAdmissionPolicy resource](/img/architecture_sequence_02.png)

<!--TODO:There is ClusterAdmissionPolicy inside and outside the API
Server box.  What is this signifying? And for PolicyServer? Definition
of reconcile? Just to find the PolicyServer that matches the
ClusterAdmissionPolicy?-->

The `kubewarden-controller` notices the new `ClusterAdmissionPolicy` resource and
so finds the bound `PolicyServer` and reconciles it.

### Reconciliation of `policy-server`

<!--TODO:'reconciliation loop', can we show this loop in the diagram
somehow? ConfigMap, should be in the diagram? In the OCI registry?-->

When creating, modifying or deleting a `ClusterAdmissionPolicy`,
a reconciliation loop activates in `kubewarden-controller`,
for the `PolicyServer` owning the policy.
This reconciliation loop creates a ConfigMap with all the polices bound to the `PolicyServer`.
Then the Deployment rollout of the `policy-server` starts.
It results in starting the new `policy-server` instance with the updated configuration.

<!--TODO:Next paragraph. Download all the policies, that the configuration
specifies, right?-->

> At start time, the `policy-server` reads its configuration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At start time, the `policy-server` reads its configuration from the ConfigMap
```

and downloads all the Kubewarden policies specified.
You can download policies from remote HTTP servers and container registries.

> You use policy configuration parameters to tune a policies' behavior.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You use policy settings parameters to tune a policies' behavior.
```

Given that we call the policy settings always as settings, that is, the [`spec.settings`](https://doc.crds.dev/github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden-controller/policies.kubewarden.io/ClusterAdmissionPolicy/v1@v1.7.0-rc3#spec-settings), maybe it's good to not mix both terms and always use settings.

spawns a pool of worker threads
to evaluate incoming requests
using the Kubewarden policies
specified by the user.

<!--TODO:Is the HTTPS server referred to, that which is in the aquamarine
box, the 'Kubewarden Policy Server-->

Finally, the `policy-server` starts a HTTPS server
listening to incoming validation requests.
Kubewarden uses the TLS key and certificate
created by `kubewarden-controller`
to secure the web server.

The web server exposes each policy by a dedicated path
following the naming convention: `/validate/<policy ID>`.

This diagram shows the cluster when initialization of `policy-server` is complete:

![policy-server initialized](/img/architecture_sequence_03.png)

### Making Kubernetes aware of the policy

<!--TODO:Next paragraph. Says 'admission reviews', should that maybe be
'admission requests'-->

The `policy-server` Pods have a
[`Readiness Probe`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-liveness-readiness-startup-probes/),
that `kubewarden-controller` uses to check when
the `policy-server` Deployment is ready to evaluate admission reviews.

<!--TODO:Aware? Is notified? Notifies? Is 'notifies' technically correct? Messages?-->

> Once the readiness probe marks a `policy-server` Deployment as `Ready`,

Reviewer 2: I would prefer to leave this phrase as it was, as the readiness probe doesn't necessarily mark the the Deployment as Ready, is the k8s reconciler that does.

Author: oj, reverted.

the `kubewarden-controller` notifies the Kubernetes API server about the new policy
by creating either a `MutatingWebhookConfiguration`
or a `ValidatingWebhookConfiguration` object.

Each policy has a dedicated
`MutatingWebhookConfiguration` or `ValidatingWebhookConfiguration`
which points to the Webhook endpoint served by `policy-server`.
The endpoint is reachable by the `/validate/<policy ID>` URL.

![Kubernetes Webhook endpoint configuration](/img/architecture_sequence_04.png)

### Policy in action

<!--TODO:I made endpoints plural. I think there are many. Is that correct?-->
Now that all the necessary plumbing is complete,
Kubernetes starts sending Admission Review requests to the right `policy-server` endpoints.

![Policy in action](/img/architecture_sequence_05.png)

A `policy-server` receives the Admission Request object and,
based on the endpoint that received the request,
uses the correct policy to evaluate it.

> Each policy evaluates inside its own dedicated WebAssembly sandbox.

Reviewer 2: I would prefer to leave the passive here, as they are xecuted by the policy-server, and don't evaluate themselves.

Author: ok, done.

The communication between `policy-server` (the "host")
and the WebAssembly policy (the "guest")
uses the waPC communication protocol.

> There is a description of using the protocol in the [writing policies](/writing-policies/index.md) documentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The protocol description is part of the [writing policies](/writing-policies/index.md) documentation.
```

It also translates Kubewarden configuration into Kubernetes directives.

- Kubewarden policies:
These are WebAssembly modules holding the validation or mutation logic.
WebAssembly modules have detailed documentation in the
[writing policies](/writing-policies/index.md) sections.

- [`policy-server`](https://github.com/kubewarden/policy-server):
The `policy-server` receives requests for validation.
It validates the requests by executing Kubewarden policies.

- [audit-scanner](https://github.com/kubewarden/audit-scanner): It inspects the resources already in the cluster and identifies the ones that are violating Kubewarden policies.

Kubewarden integrates with Kubernetes using
[Dynamic Admission Control](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/extensible-admission-controllers/).
In particular, Kubewarden operates as a Kubernetes Admission Webhook.
The `policy-server` is the Webhook endpoint called by the Kubernetes API server to validate requests.

<!--TODO:Have I got this next paragraph right?-->

Kubernetes discovers Kubewarden's Webhook endpoints using `kubewarden-controller`.
This works by Kubewarden registering either a `MutatingWebhookConfiguration`

> or a `ValidatingWebhookConfiguration` object with Kubernetes.

Author: Sorry, just spotted these. I'll merge them in.

> or a `ValidatingWebhookConfiguration` object with Kubernetes.

Author: I think this was picked up by Jose and Victor as well.

We now have

The `kubewarden-controller` registers the needed
`MutatingWebhookConfiguration` or
`ValidatingWebhookConfiguration`
objects with the Kubernetes API server.

So, for review again. Thanks.
